feat(fonts): local inference (#11619)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/reference/experimental-flags/fonts.mdx

**Default:** `undefined`
</p>

> Determines the specific [range of unicode characters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range) to be used from a font. It allows the browser to only download the font file if the characters specified are present on the page. This is useful for localization:

Reviewer: From my understanding (I'm not sure I'm 100% accurate) maybe something like this could work:

```suggestion
Determines when a font must be downloaded and used based on a specific [range of unicode characters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range). If a character on the page matches one in that range, the browser will download the entire font.

This can be useful for localization when a specific part of your website uses a different alphabet. For example, for a website that offers both English and Japanese versions, you can prevent the browser from downloading the Japanese font over the English version by providing an unicode range.
```

> Determines the specific [range of unicode characters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range) to be used from a font. It allows the browser to only download the font file if the characters specified are present on the page. This is useful for localization:

Author: I like this!

> Determines the specific [range of unicode characters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range) to be used from a font. It allows the browser to only download the font file if the characters specified are present on the page. This is useful for localization:

Reviewer 2: > prevent the browser from downloading the Japanese font 

So, is the assumption here that you are using an entirely different font for the Japanese characters on your site? (So, the same would not be true for e.g. a French/English version of your site which may use the *same* font for both languages, just characters relevant for both?

If the main idea that this is not subsetting (which I believe is downloading only parts of fonts), then is it correct to say that this is useful when you are using **an entirely different font for a different language** (and not, for example, trying to pinpoint/limit/optimize for characters of a single font?)

> Determines the specific [range of unicode characters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range) to be used from a font. It allows the browser to only download the font file if the characters specified are present on the page. This is useful for localization:

Author: Yes that sounds right

> Determines the specific [range of unicode characters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range) to be used from a font. It allows the browser to only download the font file if the characters specified are present on the page. This is useful for localization:

Reviewer: Yes, that was my assumption, so what you're saying sounds right to me as well and we should probably be more explicit!

> Determines the specific [range of unicode characters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range) to be used from a font. It allows the browser to only download the font file if the characters specified are present on the page. This is useful for localization:

Reviewer 2: OK, then @ArmandPhilippot then your suggestion is just about right! 🙌  How about updating it in whatever way you see fit, adding whatever amount of explicitness you think makes sense?

> Determines the specific [range of unicode characters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range) to be used from a font. It allows the browser to only download the font file if the characters specified are present on the page. This is useful for localization:

Reviewer: > for the unicode characters specified??? or does this become the default page's font simply by matching???

For the whole font, not only the unicode characters specified. It doesn't become the "default", the user still need to explicitly define which font to use and where (but yeah, with CSS variables they can update the default font based on the `lang` attribute). But, the font will be available because the characters on the page matches.

> "displayed in a separate font" -- does this also help distinguish from subsetting?

Yeah, I think so.

So, your edit seems really good to me. I only updated the `use it on the page` part to be a bit more explicit based on your other question:

```suggestion
Determines when a font must be downloaded and used based on a specific [range of unicode characters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range). If a character on the page matches the configured range, the browser will download the font and all characters will be available for use on the page. To configure a subset of characters preloaded for a single font, see the [subsets](https://github.com/withastro/docs/pull/11619#subsets) property instead.

This can be useful for localization to avoid unnecessary font downloads when a specific part of your website uses a different alphabet and will be displayed with a separate font. For example, a website that offers both English and Japanese versions can prevent the browser from downloading the Japanese font on English versions of the page that do not contain any of the Japanese characters provided in `unicodeRange`.
```

> Determines the specific [range of unicode characters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range) to be used from a font. It allows the browser to only download the font file if the characters specified are present on the page. This is useful for localization:

Reviewer 2: Looks great to me, I would just check the link is just `(#subsets)`??

> Determines the specific [range of unicode characters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range) to be used from a font. It allows the browser to only download the font file if the characters specified are present on the page. This is useful for localization:

Reviewer: Oops, great catch! It seems the copy/paste has added funny things. 😅 I updated the suggestion!

> Determines the specific [range of unicode characters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/unicode-range) to be used from a font. It allows the browser to only download the font file if the characters specified are present on the page. This is useful for localization:

Reviewer 3: A clarification (which shouldn't affect the wording): don't be misled by "different font" though. These will likely be the same family, just split into different font files. So there might be "Noto Sans Simplified Chinese" and "Noto Sans Japanese", which are the same font family (and will share a lot of the same glyphs), but will each be just the subset used to display those particular locales.
